Update DRA KEP to explain CEL handling (#9841)
kubernetes-sigs/kueue: keps/2941-DRA/README.md

  `extendedResourceName`, Kueue unifies quota** using the `deviceClassMappings` logical
  name as the quota key for both paths, preventing over-allocation.

- CEL selectors in ResourceClaimTemplates are validated against cluster devices (ResourceSlices) at admission

>   time on a best-effort basis. Workloads with CEL selectors that match fewer devices than requested are rejected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CEL selectors in ResourceClaimTemplates are validated against cluster devices (ResourceSlices) at qtuota reservation
  time on a best-effort basis. Workloads with CEL selectors that match fewer devices than requested are rejected
```

Does this mean `QuotaReservation` phase?

Author: yes.

>   to prevent quota leaks. This validation uses the upstream DRA CEL compiler from `k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/cel`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  to prevent quota leaks. This validation uses the upstream DRA CEL compiler from [`k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/cel`](https://github.com/kubernetes/dynamic-resource-allocation/tree/master/cel).
```

>   Note that devices can be allocated between Kueue's check and scheduling, and new ResourceSlices published after

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  On the other hand, devices can be allocated between Kueue's check and scheduling, and new ResourceSlices published after
```

This is the NOTE section.

  validation can make previously-unsatisfiable workloads satisfiable without triggering re-evaluation until the
  next periodic `queueInadmissibleWorkloads` cycle. `WaitForPodsReady` serves as the safety net for cases where

>   the validation state diverges from actual device availability at scheduling time.

Reviewer: Yes, correct. We can strengthen validations by TAS in the future.
But, it's out of scope at this time.

  `extendedResourceName`, Kueue unifies quota** using the `deviceClassMappings` logical
  name as the quota key for both paths, preventing over-allocation.

> - CEL selectors in ResourceClaimTemplates are validated against cluster devices (ResourceSlices) at qtuota reservation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CEL selectors in ResourceClaimTemplates are validated against cluster devices (ResourceSlices) at quota reservation
```

nit: typo

```

**Required Permissions:**
- `resourceclaims`: Read access to validate ResourceClaim references (though not supported for quota)
- `resourceclaimtemplates`: Read access to process ResourceClaimTemplates and extract device class information
- `resourceslices`: Read access to list cluster devices for CEL selector validation
- `deviceclasses`: Read access to resolve DeviceClass selectors for device pre-filtering during CEL evaluation

**Security Considerations:**
- Kueue only requires read permissions - no create, update, or delete access to DRA resources
- Permissions are cluster-scoped to allow processing workloads across all namespaces
- No elevated privileges required beyond standard Kueue controller permissions

### CEL Expression Validation

ResourceClaimTemplates may include CEL (Common Expression Language) selectors that constrain which devices
can satisfy a request. Kueue validates these CEL selectors before admitting a workload to prevent quota from
being consumed by workloads whose pods can never be scheduled.

The validation has two stages:

1. **CEL Compilation**: Each CEL expression in the request's selectors is compiled using the upstream DRA CEL

>    compiler (`k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/cel`). This catches syntax errors, type errors, and other

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   compiler ([`k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/cel`](https://github.com/kubernetes/dynamic-resource-allocation/tree/master/cel)). This catches syntax errors, type errors, and other
```

>    compilation issues before quota admission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   compilation issues before quota reservation.
```

I'd like to distinguish between admission and reservation.

2. **CEL Evaluation Against Cluster Devices**: Kueue lists all ResourceSlices in the cluster and evaluates
   the compiled CEL selectors against actual devices. For each request:
   - The DeviceClass is resolved and its selectors are compiled to pre-filter devices by class, avoiding
     CEL evaluation against unrelated devices (e.g., NICs when requesting GPUs).
   - The request's CEL selectors are evaluated against matching devices.
   - If fewer devices match than the requested count, the workload is marked inadmissible with a descriptive
     error indicating that no matching devices exist in the cluster, preventing quota consumption for
     unsatisfiable requests. The condition message clearly distinguishes between device-based inadmissibility
     (e.g., "insufficient matching devices for CEL selector") and quota-based inadmissibility so that users
     know whether they need to adjust their CEL selectors / request admin hardware changes, or wait for

>      quota to become available.

Reviewer: Which Workload condition type does this indicate? QuotaReserved?

Author: Yes, eventually this ends up in QuotaReserved.

Reviewer: In that case, can you mention the `QuotaReserved` in this message like the following:

```suggestion
     unsatisfiable requests. The `QuotaReserved` condition message clearly distinguishes between device-based inadmissibility
     (e.g., "insufficient matching devices for CEL selector") and quota-based inadmissibility so that users
     know whether they need to adjust their CEL selectors / request admin hardware changes, or wait for
     quota to become available.
```

(I just aded `QuotaReseerved` term)

> **Example**: A ResourceClaimTemplate requesting 2 GPUs with `device.capacity["memory"].compareTo(quantity("80Gi")) >= 0`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Example**: A ResourceClaimTemplate requesting 2 GPUs with `device.capacity["gpu.example.com"].memory.compareTo(quantity("80Gi")) >= 0`
```

ditto

will be checked against actual devices in the cluster. If only 1 device matches, the workload is rejected
before consuming quota.

```yaml
apiVersion: resource.k8s.io/v1
kind: ResourceClaimTemplate
metadata:
  name: large-gpu
spec:
  spec:
    devices:
      requests:
      - name: gpu
        exactly:
          deviceClassName: gpu.example.com
          count: 2
          selectors:
          - cel:

>               expression: 'device.capacity["memory"].compareTo(quantity("80Gi")) >= 0'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
              expression: 'device.capacity["gpu.example.com"].memory.compareTo(quantity("80Gi")) >= 0'
```

Is this example really correct? As I can see https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/03779bbd00da25c7fcd03711ddfe466a3322e1d7/pkg/apis/resource/types.go#L1241, my suggestion is correct.

> ```

Reviewer: In this example, how many quotas will be consumed in ClusterQueue?
Let's say that we have the following ClusterQueue, then all the ResourceSlices have only GPUs with 100Gi VRAM. In that case, will ClusterQueue consume only `example.com/gpu: 1` even if it takes larger GPU resources compared with the minimum request size (80Gi)?

```yaml
apiVersion: config.kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: Configuration
...
resources:
  deviceClassMappings:
  - name: example.com/gpu
    deviceClassNames:
    - gpu.example.com
---
apiVersion: kueue.x-k8s.io/v1beta2
kind: ClusterQueue
...
spec:
  resourceGroups:
  - coveredResources: ["cpu", "memory", "example.com/gpu"]
    flavors:
    - name: "default-flavor"
      resources:
      - name: "cpu"
        nominalQuota: 40
      - name: "memory"
        nominalQuota: 200Gi
      - name: "example.com/gpu"
        nominalQuota: 8
```

Author: This can be somewhat related to @PannagaRao and @sohankunkerkar work on partionable devices.

Reviewer 2: With deviceClassMappings alone, Kueue charges device count — `example.com/gpu: 2` in this example. 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
With counterMappings from [#10320](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/kueue/pull/10320), Kueue reads consumesCounters from matched devices and charges based on actual counter values. The charge is MAX(counter across all matched devices) × count. In this example, if all GPUs have 100Gi memory, the charge would be gpu.memory: 100Gi × 2 = 200Gi

Author: For Kueue could we even do quota on VRAM for GPU? 

I think the resources has to point to the deviceClass.

Reviewer: @PannagaRao @kannon92 Thank you for describing that. I understand what happens here.
I'm wondering if we should `counterMappings` somehow mechanism as part of this CEL evaluation mechanism? Otherwise, there will be large gaps between actual consuming device capacities and consumed quotas.

Author: I think there is plans to use this PR for the PartionableDevices work.

There is a separate KEP for that. I think we should keep this separate for now.

CounterMappings is only relevant if you are using PartitionableDevices but the cel expression is a GA feature for structured parameters.

Reviewer: > I think there is plans to use this PR for the PartionableDevices work.
> 
> There is a separate KEP for that. I think we should keep this separate for now.
> 
> CounterMappings is only relevant if you are using PartitionableDevices but the cel expression is a GA feature for structured parameters.

The key point is `Otherwise, there will be large gaps between actual consuming device capacities and consumed quotas.`.

So, if we don't introduce the `counterMappings` somehow mechanism for DRA CEL impls, we should restrict DRA CEL usage only when they use DRA CEL with DRA PartitionableDevices.

Otherwise, this DRA CEL introduces critical Quota violations because, as I mentioned, DRA CEL w/o `counterMappings` can not guarantee how many actual resources are consumed.

Author: I'm not really following you here.

If I have a request with CEL asking for > 80 GB of memory, it will get the device and then count the request to that device.

CEL is more about getting the right device class and not about enforcing GPU memory. With GPUs there isn't really a way to enforce memory as you would with cgroups. 

Maybe I focused too much on CEL for memory in this update but CEL is basically a way to get any kind of attribute. You could use it to say "I want a specific device" ex: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/dra-example-driver/blob/main/demo/gpu-test8.yaml.

For DRANET, you can see other examples: https://dranet.dev/docs/user/mpi-operator/.

In these examples we are grabbing a certain device with specific attributes. The hope of adding CEL is to support things all the ways CEL can be used with DRA.

I don't think CEL evaulation needs to tie into Partionable devices. Happy to discuss tomorrow if you have more questions.

Reviewer 3: Hm, I'm also not following where is the concern, but I'm maybe missing some of the DRA context. 

Let me ask about this specific scenario - in my ResourceFlavor, I have 
- 2 devices with 1 GPU, 80Gi mem 
- 2 devices with 1 GPU, 40Gi mem

Now, with the configurations as above I have workloads 
- (1.) matching >=80Gi devices, and requesting 1 device, so it consumes `example.com/gpu: 1` - admitted by quota, binds to one of the machines; 3 GPU of quota left 
- (2.) matching >=80Gi devices, and requesting 1 device, so it consumes `example.com/gpu: 1` - admitted by quota, binds to one of the machines; 2 GPU of quota left
- (3.) matching >=80Gi devices, and requesting 1 device, so it consumes `example.com/gpu: 1` - admitted by quota, but cannot find the machines because the only two 80Gi machines are already taken; It cannot schedule using 2 machines with 40Gi each

So (3.) means the workload remains pending, which is a right risk to call out. However:
1. I think this risk always existed in quota-only Kueue, also even without DRA Kueue could admit workload requesting 8GPU in one Pod, even though there all machines have only 1GPU
2. In my mind this is where Kueue needs to know "infra", and for that we will have the DRA-TAS integration via scheduler-library which will fix such issues
3. for now this would be the risk we need to document, but I don't think this should prevent the CEL support completely (unless I'm missing something)

Reviewer 3: In other words, I think the lack of machine / infra awareness is indeed a risk, but it is not new, and in Kueue the right layer to fix problems like this is TAS. So, we would still consume the quota the same, but block admission of workload (3.) based on TAS+DRA constraints rather than quota.

Reviewer: @mimowo Thank you for getting back comments here.

As I chatted with @mimowo in Slack, I almost agreed with this fragmentation between Node-level resources and quota. Certainly, we have some risks when cluster admins misconfigure too flexible CEL parameters like `'device.capacity["memory"].compareTo(quantity("16Gi")) >= 0'`. In this scenario, if the cluster has only accelerators with over 141 GiB VRAM, it looks like a very soft restriction.

But, the same as before TAS, we had similar problems about fragmentations in non-DRA environments as well. We can recommend not specifying too flexible CEL parameters to avoid much fragmentation between Node allocatable resources and nominalQuota in our user documentation.

And, in the future, we can mitigate these risks in TAS+DRA functionalities.

> **Dependencies**: This feature imports `k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/cel` for CEL compilation and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Dependencies**: This feature imports [`k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/cel`](https://github.com/kubernetes/dynamic-resource-allocation/tree/master/cel) for CEL compilation and
```

This link could help to understand what is this library.

Author: updated.

- `deviceclasses`: Read access to resolve DeviceClass selectors for device pre-filtering during CEL evaluation

**Security Considerations:**
- Kueue only requires read permissions - no create, update, or delete access to DRA resources
- Permissions are cluster-scoped to allow processing workloads across all namespaces
- No elevated privileges required beyond standard Kueue controller permissions

### CEL Expression Validation

ResourceClaimTemplates may include CEL (Common Expression Language) selectors that constrain which devices
can satisfy a request. Kueue validates these CEL selectors before admitting a workload to prevent quota from
being consumed by workloads whose pods can never be scheduled.

The validation has two stages:

1. **CEL Compilation**: Each CEL expression in the request's selectors is compiled using the upstream DRA CEL
   compiler ([`k8s.io/dynamic-resource-allocation/cel`](https://github.com/kubernetes/dynamic-resource-allocation/tree/master/cel)). This catches syntax errors, type errors, and other
   compilation issues before quota reservation.

2. **CEL Evaluation Against Cluster Devices**: Kueue lists all ResourceSlices in the cluster and evaluates

>    the compiled CEL selectors against actual devices. For each request:

Reviewer: I'm just wondering if we can filter out the obtaining ResourceSlices instead of obtaining all ResourceSlices to improve the Kueue performance.

@kannon92 Are we able that?

Author: Maybe. It is indexed by driverName but resource slices can be at the node level so I'm not sure how much that would gain us.

Reviewer: My motivation for the filtering of ResourceSlice is optimizing performance both for Kueue cache and the kube-apiserver load. I'm ok with postponing the optimizations to Beta or GA graduation.

Can you add such optimization to the graduation criteria?

Author: Done.

   - Read the ResourceClaimTemplate from the same namespace as the workload
   - Extract deviceClassName from each request in the template spec
   - Look up the corresponding resource name using the device class mappings from the Configuration API
5. CEL Selector Validation: For requests with CEL selectors:
   - Compile CEL expressions and reject workloads with invalid syntax
   - Evaluate CEL selectors against actual devices from ResourceSlices, pre-filtering by DeviceClass
   - Reject workloads where fewer devices match than requested count
6. Resource Preprocessing:
   - Calculate total device count per device class across all containers and init containers
   - Map device classes to resource names using the configuration
   - Generate preprocessed resource requests for queue admission

> 7. Queue Admission: Add the workload to the queue with preprocessed DRA resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
7. Queue Reservation: Add the workload to the queue with preprocessed DRA resources.
```

   - Read the ResourceClaimTemplate from the same namespace as the workload
   - Extract deviceClassName from each request in the template spec
   - Look up the corresponding resource name using the device class mappings from the Configuration API
5. CEL Selector Validation: For requests with CEL selectors:
   - Compile CEL expressions and reject workloads with invalid syntax
   - Evaluate CEL selectors against actual devices from ResourceSlices, pre-filtering by DeviceClass
   - Reject workloads where fewer devices match than requested count
6. Resource Preprocessing:
   - Calculate total device count per device class across all containers and init containers
   - Map device classes to resource names using the configuration
   - Generate preprocessed resource requests for queue admission
7. Queue Reservation: Add the workload to the queue with preprocessed DRA resources.

> 8. Status Update: Once admitted, the workload status reflects the assigned flavors and resource usage including DRA resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
8. Status Update: Once the quota is reserved, the workload status reflects the assigned flavors and resource usage, including DRA resources.
```

nit: admission -> quota reservation

- Alpha implementation completed: December 2024
- KEP updated to reflect actual implementation: September 2025 by @alaypatel07
- Extended Resources implementation: January 2026

> - CEL expression validation support added: March 2026 by @kannon92

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- CEL expression validation support added: April 2026 by @kannon92
```

Let's update this after v0.17 release.
